README.md, before:

# ORION CHIP-8 Emulator

CHIP-8 emulator written in C with Nuklear gui library.

**Main Emulator** | **CHIP-8 Pong 2 game**
:-------------------------:|:-------------------------:
<img width="380" alt="main" src="https://github.com/cassianoperin/Orion-CHIP8-Emulator/blob/main/images/Orion-Main.png">  |  <img width="380" alt="pong2" src="https://github.com/cassianoperin/Orion-CHIP8-Emulator/blob/main/images/Orion-Pong2.png">

**Debug Screen**|
:-------------------------:|
<img width="787" alt="debug" src="https://github.com/cassianoperin/Orion-CHIP8-Emulator/blob/main/images/Orion-Debug.png"> |

## CHIP8 Status
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) CPU Opcodes
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Memory
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Registers
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Graphics
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Qwirks
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Sound
## CHIP8 HiRes
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) CPU Opcodes
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Memory
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Registers
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Graphics
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Qwirks
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Sound
## SCHIP Status
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) CPU Opcodes
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Memory
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Registers
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Graphics
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Qwirks
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Sound
## Emulator
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Pause and resume emulation
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Reset emulation
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Color Themes
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Binary rom format support
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Hexadecimal rom format support
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Step Forward CPU Cycles for Debug
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Increase and Decrease CPU Clock Speed
* ![10%](https://progress-bar.xyz/10) Keyboard remaps
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Step Back (Rewind) CPU Cycles for Debug
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Save States
* ![50%](https://progress-bar.xyz/50) Fullscreen
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Emulation Status from all games I have to test

## EMULATOR Usage

1. Run:

	`$./orion`

2. Keys
- Original COSMAC Keyboard Layout (CHIP-8):

	`1` `2` `3` `C`

	`4` `5` `6` `D`

	`7` `8` `9` `E`

	`A` `0` `B` `F`

- **Keys used in this emulator:**

	`1` `2` `3` `4`

	`Q` `W` `E` `R`

	`A` `S` `D` `F`

	`Z` `X` `C` `V`

	`P` and `ESC`: Pause and Resume emulation

	`5`: Decrease CPU Clock Speed

	`6`: Increase CPU Clock Speed
    
	`9`: Enable / Disable Debug Mode

	`0`: Reset

	`I`: Increase CPU Cycle (in paused mode))


## EMULATOR Build Instructions

### MAC
* Install C:

	`brew install gcc make sdl2 (MAP PACKAGES!!)`

* Compile:

	`make`

* Vscode Setup:

   Install these extensions:

   - C/C++ (Microsoft)

   - Code runner (Jun Han)

   Press F5 to compile and run code.


## Documentation

### Chip-8
[Cowgod's Chip-8 Technical Reference](http://devernay.free.fr/hacks/chip8/C8TECH10.HTM#0.0)

[How to write an emulator (CHIP-8 interpreter) — Multigesture.net](http://www.multigesture.net/articles/how-to-write-an-emulator-chip-8-interpreter/)

[Wikipedia - CHIP-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CHIP-8)

[trapexit chip-8 documentation](https://github.com/trapexit/chip-8_documentation)

[Thomas Daley Wiki (Game Compatibility)](https://github.com/tomdaley92/kiwi-8/issues/9)

[David Winter Documentation](http://vanbeveren.byethost13.com/stuff/CHIP8.pdf?i=2)

[Chip-8 Database](https://chip-8.github.io/database/)

[Archive chip8.com](https://web.archive.org/web/20160401091945/http://www.chip8.com/)

[Columbia University - Columbia University](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~sedwards/classes/2016/4840-spring/designs/Chip8.pdf)

[Tom Swan Documentation](https://github.com/TomSwan/pips-for-vips)

[Chip 8 Instruction Scheduling and Frequency](https://jackson-s.me/2019/07/13/Chip-8-Instruction-Scheduling-and-Frequency.html)


### Superchip (SCHIP)
[HP48 Superchip](https://github.com/Chromatophore/HP48-Superchip)

[SCHIP](http://devernay.free.fr/hacks/chip8/schip.txt)

[Chip-8 Reference Manual](http://chip8.sourceforge.net/chip8-1.1.pdf)


### Other Chip-8 Extensions
[CHIP‐8 Extensions Reference](https://github.com/mattmikolay/chip-8/wiki/CHIP%E2%80%908-Extensions-Reference)

[CHIP‐8 Extensions (Github)](https://chip-8.github.io/extensions/)

[Chip8 Hybrids](https://www.ngemu.com/threads/chip8-thread.114578/page-22/)

[MegaChip](https://github.com/gcsmith/gchip/blob/master/docs/megachip10.txt)


### Emulators

[Octo](https://johnearnest.github.io/Octo/)

[EMMA02 Opcodes Documentation](https://www.emma02.hobby-site.com/pseudo_chip8.html)

### Nuklear
[Nuklear GUI](https://github.com/Immediate-Mode-UI/Nuklear)


### Memory leak testing

Test memory leaks on binary:

`leaks --atExit --list -- main`


## TODO

### Compatibility Tests

1. Test more games (Need SCHIP):

    CHIP-8 Archive - A collection of public domain (CC0) games, all playable online.
    A collection of CHIP-8 programs and documentation - Matt Mikolay's games, programs and documentation.

    https://johnearnest.github.io/chip8Archive/
	https://www.revival-studios.com/other.php

2. Add result status of known chip-8 test suites and roms

### Improvements

## Emulation

1. Add SCHIP and other extensions

2) Reduce the number of global variables and code cleaning

3) Improve DXYN function (replace the last part by a XOR)

4) Change graphics array to dynamic
	destroy and recreate window after?
	https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3827892/how-can-i-change-the-size-of-an-array-in-c

5) Raus recommendations:

- Replace signature by SHA1
- display wait should't be on by default
- to simplify all "cores" you plan to support, you may prefer to increment the PC after the fetching of the opcode, instead of doing it per-instruction
- your stack never utilizes index 0 because you increment the counter on a routine before you set the opcode, rather than setting the opcode first and incrementing after (which also requires a return to decrement first)
- you also don't have safety bars if the stack under/overflows
- similarly, you might prefer to define x/y/n/nn/nnn after the instruction fetch before you get into the instruction matching part, and feed them as arguments 
- also, your debugs may fail to report correct values for the likes of V[x] and such due to the values having changed beforehand. you'll need to place the debugs first and foremost
- your 8xy4 is weirdly complex, just calc sum as short or larger, then store the lower 8 bits in v[x] and shift down the 9th bit into vf
- your CxNN should just mask rand() directly with nn and be done with it, that modulo is useless, and also limits the range to 0..254
- I am legit unsure how you passed the display test from my oob test rom your dxyn has the potential to overwrite whatever vx or vy holds when you set vf to 0 because either of them could be the vf register
so it is NOT allowed to use the vx/vy directly in the draw loop itself, you must make a copy of the coordinates
(unless you only set vf to the amount of collisions at the very end by using another var to hold collision status in the meantime)
--- that commented alternate version's good, if only some work is done to tackle clipping vs wrapping which is basically non-existent right now
- Ex9E/ExA1/Fx29/Fx30 will mask the value coming from Vx with 0xF to only keep the lower 4 bits (0..15) you don't need to do subtracting and throw errors, it's how they're meant to work
- get rid of that spacefight quirk in Fx1E, it's a myth and does not exist, the rom is merely buggy, and there exists a version that fixes the bugs
- SCHIP -
-- legacy superchip: always 128x64 resolution, lores coords/draws are doubled (thus why scrolls are half as effective too), dxy0 draws 8x16 sprites, vf will either be 0 or 1. In hires, collisions count per-row (so vf can be > 1), and dxy0 draws 16x16 sprites.
-- modern superchip: resolution is either 64x32 or 128x64 depending on lores/hires respectively. vf collision is only ever 0 or 1. both modes in dxy0 draw 16x16.

Gulrak:
- Assembly: 
-- https://johnearnest.github.io/Octo/docs/Manual.html
-- https://chip8.gulrak.net/
-- https://groups.google.com/g/comp.sys.hp48/c/e7In51mOgHY
-  in legacy SCHIP, lores mode is using display wait, while hires is not
- Fx1E vf handling
- and using v[x] and v[y] in the draw loop could easily lead to roms behaving odd.
- And it is correct that vx containing a value > 0xF in Ex9E, ExA1, Fx29 and Fx30 is not an error as only the lower four bits are to be used by these opcodes, so masking them with 0xFwhen using them is the correct way to handle it. (CHIP-8 on the VIP masks them (and the original documentation even documents that only the lower nibble is used but that info got lost in translation in most modern opcode decumentations), and SCHIP originally runs on a HP-48SX, and it has a 4bit CPU, and only uses the lower nibble.)
- I had a quick look at the source, and while that also should not be the reason for Most Dangerous Game to not work, there is no "undocumented opcode" 02D8 (or 02E4 or anything like that for that matter) in CHIP-8, Tick-Tack-Toe is a hybrid rom needing 1802 assembly support as the code for that "opcode" is in the program, so making it an fixed opcode would of course break every other hybrid program having a function there. They all are the 0NNN that is used to call a machine language program at NNN and exists on COSMAC-VIP CHIP-8 (and most CDP1802 based variants) and the DREAM6800 and its CHIPOS. SCHIP doesn't support 0NNN, and neither do other variants I know of, and any hybrid rom would of course be architecture specific. One could imho add special emulation for this for each hybrid rom that is out there, but  I'd argue that they should only be active if such a rom is recognized like by an SHA1 checksum as the CHIP-8 program database uses them. It's of course just my opinion, but I would not count them as opcodes if they are not part of the interpreter.



## GUI

1. Build a "cycle accurate" cpu, with a 12bits address bus and 8 bit data bus for visual representations


## Display

1. Duplicate or triplicate frame buffer to reduce flickering
https://www.reddit.com/r/EmuDev/comments/n9dcli/comment/gxnnzdw/


## Input

1. Add mouse map to control some games like pong


### Problems

1) Games not working:
    * Breakout Camelo Cortez
	* Most Dangerous Game [Peter Maruhnic]

2) INPUT: When the first key is pressed, freeze the emulation by a second (with input_keyboard_remaps() enabled). Table and update value? Pointer?

3) Stack is incrementing first (start on 1)

Commit message:

Replaced per-instruction PC increment by an after fetch update

README.md, after:

# ORION CHIP-8 Emulator

CHIP-8 emulator written in C with Nuklear gui library.

**Main Emulator** | **CHIP-8 Pong 2 game**
:-------------------------:|:-------------------------:
<img width="380" alt="main" src="https://github.com/cassianoperin/Orion-CHIP8-Emulator/blob/main/images/Orion-Main.png">  |  <img width="380" alt="pong2" src="https://github.com/cassianoperin/Orion-CHIP8-Emulator/blob/main/images/Orion-Pong2.png">

**Debug Screen**|
:-------------------------:|
<img width="787" alt="debug" src="https://github.com/cassianoperin/Orion-CHIP8-Emulator/blob/main/images/Orion-Debug.png"> |

## CHIP8 Status
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) CPU Opcodes
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Memory
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Registers
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Graphics
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Qwirks
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Sound
## CHIP8 HiRes
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) CPU Opcodes
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Memory
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Registers
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Graphics
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Qwirks
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Sound
## SCHIP Status
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) CPU Opcodes
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Memory
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Registers
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Graphics
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Qwirks
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Sound
## Emulator
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Pause and resume emulation
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Reset emulation
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Color Themes
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Binary rom format support
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Hexadecimal rom format support
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Step Forward CPU Cycles for Debug
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Increase and Decrease CPU Clock Speed
* ![10%](https://progress-bar.xyz/10) Keyboard remaps
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Step Back (Rewind) CPU Cycles for Debug
* ![0%](https://progress-bar.xyz/0) Save States
* ![50%](https://progress-bar.xyz/50) Fullscreen
* ![100%](https://progress-bar.xyz/100) Emulation Status from all games I have to test

## EMULATOR Usage

1. Run:

	`$./orion`

2. Keys
- Original COSMAC Keyboard Layout (CHIP-8):

	`1` `2` `3` `C`

	`4` `5` `6` `D`

	`7` `8` `9` `E`

	`A` `0` `B` `F`

- **Keys used in this emulator:**

	`1` `2` `3` `4`

	`Q` `W` `E` `R`

	`A` `S` `D` `F`

	`Z` `X` `C` `V`

	`P` and `ESC`: Pause and Resume emulation

	`5`: Decrease CPU Clock Speed

	`6`: Increase CPU Clock Speed
    
	`9`: Enable / Disable Debug Mode

	`0`: Reset

	`I`: Increase CPU Cycle (in paused mode))


## EMULATOR Build Instructions

### MAC
* Install C:

	`brew install gcc make sdl2 (MAP PACKAGES!!)`

* Compile:

	`make`

* Vscode Setup:

   Install these extensions:

   - C/C++ (Microsoft)

   - Code runner (Jun Han)

   Press F5 to compile and run code.


## Documentation

### Chip-8
[Cowgod's Chip-8 Technical Reference](http://devernay.free.fr/hacks/chip8/C8TECH10.HTM#0.0)

[How to write an emulator (CHIP-8 interpreter) — Multigesture.net](http://www.multigesture.net/articles/how-to-write-an-emulator-chip-8-interpreter/)

[Wikipedia - CHIP-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CHIP-8)

[trapexit chip-8 documentation](https://github.com/trapexit/chip-8_documentation)

[Thomas Daley Wiki (Game Compatibility)](https://github.com/tomdaley92/kiwi-8/issues/9)

[David Winter Documentation](http://vanbeveren.byethost13.com/stuff/CHIP8.pdf?i=2)

[Chip-8 Database](https://chip-8.github.io/database/)

[Archive chip8.com](https://web.archive.org/web/20160401091945/http://www.chip8.com/)

[Columbia University - Columbia University](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~sedwards/classes/2016/4840-spring/designs/Chip8.pdf)

[Tom Swan Documentation](https://github.com/TomSwan/pips-for-vips)

[Chip 8 Instruction Scheduling and Frequency](https://jackson-s.me/2019/07/13/Chip-8-Instruction-Scheduling-and-Frequency.html)


### Superchip (SCHIP)
[HP48 Superchip](https://github.com/Chromatophore/HP48-Superchip)

[SCHIP](http://devernay.free.fr/hacks/chip8/schip.txt)

[Chip-8 Reference Manual](http://chip8.sourceforge.net/chip8-1.1.pdf)


### Other Chip-8 Extensions
[CHIP‐8 Extensions Reference](https://github.com/mattmikolay/chip-8/wiki/CHIP%E2%80%908-Extensions-Reference)

[CHIP‐8 Extensions (Github)](https://chip-8.github.io/extensions/)

[Chip8 Hybrids](https://www.ngemu.com/threads/chip8-thread.114578/page-22/)

[MegaChip](https://github.com/gcsmith/gchip/blob/master/docs/megachip10.txt)


### Emulators

[Octo](https://johnearnest.github.io/Octo/)

[EMMA02 Opcodes Documentation](https://www.emma02.hobby-site.com/pseudo_chip8.html)

### Nuklear
[Nuklear GUI](https://github.com/Immediate-Mode-UI/Nuklear)


### Memory leak testing

Test memory leaks on binary:

`leaks --atExit --list -- main`


## TODO

### Compatibility Tests

1. Test more games (Need SCHIP):

    CHIP-8 Archive - A collection of public domain (CC0) games, all playable online.
    A collection of CHIP-8 programs and documentation - Matt Mikolay's games, programs and documentation.

    https://johnearnest.github.io/chip8Archive/
	https://www.revival-studios.com/other.php

2. Add result status of known chip-8 test suites and roms

### Improvements

## Emulation

1. Add SCHIP and other extensions

2) Reduce the number of global variables and code cleaning

3) Improve DXYN function (replace the last part by a XOR)

4) Change graphics array to dynamic
	destroy and recreate window after?
	https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3827892/how-can-i-change-the-size-of-an-array-in-c

5) Raus recommendations:

- Replace signature by SHA1
- display wait should't be on by default
- your stack never utilizes index 0 because you increment the counter on a routine before you set the opcode, rather than setting the opcode first and incrementing after (which also requires a return to decrement first)
- you also don't have safety bars if the stack under/overflows
- similarly, you might prefer to define x/y/n/nn/nnn after the instruction fetch before you get into the instruction matching part, and feed them as arguments 
- also, your debugs may fail to report correct values for the likes of V[x] and such due to the values having changed beforehand. you'll need to place the debugs first and foremost
- your 8xy4 is weirdly complex, just calc sum as short or larger, then store the lower 8 bits in v[x] and shift down the 9th bit into vf
- your CxNN should just mask rand() directly with nn and be done with it, that modulo is useless, and also limits the range to 0..254
- I am legit unsure how you passed the display test from my oob test rom your dxyn has the potential to overwrite whatever vx or vy holds when you set vf to 0 because either of them could be the vf register
so it is NOT allowed to use the vx/vy directly in the draw loop itself, you must make a copy of the coordinates
(unless you only set vf to the amount of collisions at the very end by using another var to hold collision status in the meantime)
--- that commented alternate version's good, if only some work is done to tackle clipping vs wrapping which is basically non-existent right now
- Ex9E/ExA1/Fx29/Fx30 will mask the value coming from Vx with 0xF to only keep the lower 4 bits (0..15) you don't need to do subtracting and throw errors, it's how they're meant to work
- get rid of that spacefight quirk in Fx1E, it's a myth and does not exist, the rom is merely buggy, and there exists a version that fixes the bugs
- 2d8 machine language jump (clock cosmac vip hybrid): either way, these "instructions" apply to a particular rom only, they can't be applied globally
- SCHIP -
-- legacy superchip: always 128x64 resolution, lores coords/draws are doubled (thus why scrolls are half as effective too), dxy0 draws 8x16 sprites, vf will either be 0 or 1. In hires, collisions count per-row (so vf can be > 1), and dxy0 draws 16x16 sprites.
-- modern superchip: resolution is either 64x32 or 128x64 depending on lores/hires respectively. vf collision is only ever 0 or 1. both modes in dxy0 draw 16x16.

Gulrak:
- Assembly: 
-- https://johnearnest.github.io/Octo/docs/Manual.html
-- https://chip8.gulrak.net/
-- https://groups.google.com/g/comp.sys.hp48/c/e7In51mOgHY

-- https://github.com/rkdud007/solchip8 ???
-- https://github.com/gulrak/chiplet
-  in legacy SCHIP, lores mode is using display wait, while hires is not
- Fx1E vf handling
- and using v[x] and v[y] in the draw loop could easily lead to roms behaving odd.
- And it is correct that vx containing a value > 0xF in Ex9E, ExA1, Fx29 and Fx30 is not an error as only the lower four bits are to be used by these opcodes, so masking them with 0xFwhen using them is the correct way to handle it. (CHIP-8 on the VIP masks them (and the original documentation even documents that only the lower nibble is used but that info got lost in translation in most modern opcode decumentations), and SCHIP originally runs on a HP-48SX, and it has a 4bit CPU, and only uses the lower nibble.)
- I had a quick look at the source, and while that also should not be the reason for Most Dangerous Game to not work, there is no "undocumented opcode" 02D8 (or 02E4 or anything like that for that matter) in CHIP-8, Tick-Tack-Toe is a hybrid rom needing 1802 assembly support as the code for that "opcode" is in the program, so making it an fixed opcode would of course break every other hybrid program having a function there. They all are the 0NNN that is used to call a machine language program at NNN and exists on COSMAC-VIP CHIP-8 (and most CDP1802 based variants) and the DREAM6800 and its CHIPOS. SCHIP doesn't support 0NNN, and neither do other variants I know of, and any hybrid rom would of course be architecture specific. One could imho add special emulation for this for each hybrid rom that is out there, but  I'd argue that they should only be active if such a rom is recognized like by an SHA1 checksum as the CHIP-8 program database uses them. It's of course just my opinion, but I would not count them as opcodes if they are not part of the interpreter.


- // Fx0A - LD Vx, K (check if I control the release)
// Wait for a key press, store the value of the key in Vx.
// All execution stops until a key is pressed, then the value of that key is stored in Vx.
// V[x] must be updated just AFTER the RELEASE of the key

// DELAY TIMER TEST


## GUI

1. Build a "cycle accurate" cpu, with a 12bits address bus and 8 bit data bus for visual representations


## Display

1. Duplicate or triplicate frame buffer to reduce flickering
https://www.reddit.com/r/EmuDev/comments/n9dcli/comment/gxnnzdw/


## Input

1. Add mouse map to control some games like pong


### Problems

1) Games not working:
    * Breakout Camelo Cortez
	* Most Dangerous Game [Peter Maruhnic]

2) INPUT: When the first key is pressed, freeze the emulation by a second (with input_keyboard_remaps() enabled). Table and update value? Pointer?

3) Stack is incrementing first (start on 1)
